the desert rain frog and if you're
thinking hold on I don't care about the
desert rain frog maybe this will change
your mind
this desert rain frog it sounds like a
dog toy but actually this is the
sonorous war-cry of a very angry frog
grace is that that's what it
sounds like when it's mad how do they
sound what it's happy what's a frog
won't it be fun to learn more about that
tonight I mean unfortunately we're not
gonna be able to do that because our
actual main story tonight is about
lethal injection that's right only three
more episodes with the greatest leading
in modern television history and I'm
burning one of them on lethal injections
and the reason I'm doing that is it's a
subject that doesn't come up very much
because frankly no one wants it to for
some reason
lethal injections aren't something that
people want to think about but they
happen frequently in America there was
one in Georgia just three nights ago and
before we go any further I know that
there are differing views on the death
penalty some believe it's a deterrent to
crime some believe it's righteous
justice and some like Wyoming State
Senator Leno chings believe it's
justified for the weirdest possible
reason the greatest man who ever lived
died via the death penalty for you and
for me I'm grateful to him for a future
hope because of this if it wasn't for
Jesus dying via the death penalty we
would all have no hope so what what your
argument for the death penalty is that
it goddess of Jesus wants maybe one day
if we kill enough people we'll get
another one it's nothing we'll get that
bonus Jesus let's just keep rolling the
dice Papa needs a new pair of Jesus's
now for the record so you know my
personal view on the death penalty is a
little different to that in that I don't
think it should exist whatsoever there's
actually no proof it has an effect on
bringing down crime it's technically
more expensive to execute someone than
it is to keep them in prison for life
and I'd argue it's wrong it's a wrong
bad thing the government should not be
able to do which kind of makes my first
two points irrelevant they're listing
reasons what you don't support the death
penalty can feel a lot listing reasons
why you're not going to your mom
well let's see here we don't have much
chemistry she lives 300 miles away oh
and oh yeah she's money so I feel I do
understand that it can be hard to
sympathize with people convicted of
heinous crimes although I will say
according to one study around 4% of
people sentenced to death are actually
innocent which in itself should give us
pause about the whole enterprise it's
the equivalent of it would make things
pretty weird with that not not the main
reason not to do it by any measure and
yet it should comfortably be
disqualifying enough on its own but
let's say that you don't care about any
of those reasons look let's say you
support the death penalty there's still
the question of how you do it and
legally injection came into vogue
because it was seen as a humane and
painless method it gains popularity
around four decades ago the state
started getting queasy about the horrors
inflicted by the electric chair one
state senator from Louisiana actually
explained his votes to switch to lethal
injection back then pretty nicely I am
for capital punishment but I think that
is a more humane way I have seen
evidence in my committee this year I've
seen photos of persons that were
electrocuted and it is I guess you'd say
kind of gross and I think that this is
probably a step in the right direction
kind of gross the electric chair
actually set some people's heads on fire
so that's kind of an understatement
putting mayonnaise on pizza is kind of
gross otherwise cute dogs with large
erections are kind of gross
driving a human being until their body's
a smoking husk is objectively horrifying
but in any case lethal injection was
sold as something akin to surgery a
medical procedure in which a doctor
helps a person gently go to sleep and
then they just don't wake up the problem
is as you will see tonight however much
we want that to be the case
it just isn't and let's start with that
idea that its medical that is more than
a bit of a stretch because lethal
injections aren't performed by medical
personnel for a pretty obvious reason
today in the United States it violates
ethical codes for physicians to be
involved so usually the people who are
involved in the executions are not
physicians and they're not properly
trained to do an IV insertion much less
an execution yeah of course anyone who's
been properly trained to perform a
procedure like a lethal injection has
also been trained never to do that
Hippocrates didn't say first do no harm
second do some harm and the exclusion of
medical personnel even extends to the
design of our lethal injection process
because it wasn't developed by
scientists in a lab it came about when
legislators in Oklahoma tried to figure
out how to do it and couldn't get any
doctors to work with them for obvious
reasons so instead they turned to the
state's medical examiner Jay Chapman who
warned them that he wasn't expert in
dead bodies but not an expert in getting
them that way
but he helped them anyway so I guess he
wasn't an expert just an enthusiast with
a can-do attitude for killing people
even under the best of circumstances
lethal injection is being administered
by amateurs and unfortunately we're very
much not under the best of circumstances
and to understand why that's true I'm
afraid you can I have to understand some
of the specifics of how lethal
injections work well the actual protocol
varies from state to state
most administer drugs in three steps
first they give an anesthetic to put the
inmate to sleep second a paralytic to
stop the limbs from moving around
there's actually no medical reason for
that it's just for the benefit of the
people watching so that they won't see a
body file or convulse as the third drug
initiates cardiac arrest and the really
important thing to understand here is
that the second and third drug in this
procedure are both in their own ways
horrifying the third drug apparently
feels like fire being poured into your
veins and even the second drug the one
remember that only for the benefit of
onlookers is nightmarish if you are not
completely knocked out if the inmate is
not unconscious and the inmate receives
a second drug that paralyzes the muscles
that is a horrible horrible situation
where you are awake but you cannot move
you cannot breathe see the sensation of
suffocating essentially and you can't
communicate to anybody that this is
happening yeah you could be fully aware
feel like you're suffocating but unable
to move or communicate while fire is
about to be injected into your veins and
this somehow qualifies as more humane
than an electric chair which seems
pretty debatable at best it's like
saying which movie has sexiest CGI
characters Zootopia or Monsters Inc I
mean probably Monsters Inc but it's not
clear-cut and the question in and of
itself is very disturbing
so if steps two and three are torture
the first drug in the sequence becomes
critically important because in theory
it's supposed to keep you from feeling
the other two now we used to use a drug
for this called sodium thiopental but it
stopped being made here in 2011 and it's
no longer approved by the FDA for import
into the country although some states
have tried to weasel around that
restriction 5 years ago when
zona needed drugs to execute an inmate
named Jeffrey Landrigan it purchased
them illegally from a supplier operating
out of this driving school in London
holy that is the most lethal thing
to come out of a British driving school
since Prince Philip and even when that
supply got cut off states didn't give up
they looked all over the place for
replacement drugs Texas tried buying
them from both a supply in India that
also made illegal party pills and having
them custom made by a small independent
pharmacy which also operated as a gift
shop which is just perfect if you want
to pick up execution drugs but also give
the inmates a little goodbye gift oh wow
an oven mitt with googly eyes on it
you shouldn't have Barbra I mean you
really absolutely shouldn't have what
the is wrong with you nowadays most
states have given up on sodium
thiopental and instead for that crucial
first step they use a drug called
midazolam which you should know is a
sedative not a general anesthetic so it
relaxes you but doesn't do anything to
actually stop pain one expert has called
it a martini in a syringe which sounds
like a James Bond's rock bottom and be
not nearly enough if I'm about to feel
suffocated with fire in my veins and
when called upon in court to justify
using a sedative with no pain killing
properties during a procedure this
painful states have relied almost
exclusively on this man dr. Roswell Lee
Evans he's testified as the key expert
witness in favor of midazolam on behalf
of six different states even though he's
not actually a medical doctor he got his
pharmacy doctorate after just 18 months
of post-grad study before midazolam even
existed and has basically been working
as a college administrator since 1994
and if you think it will hold on how do
you know he's not been conducting
research on midazolam or a bunch of
other anesthetics since then well just
watch this sequence of questions that he
answered during a deposition have you
been involved in research involving the
use of the daze lamp no have you been
involved in research involving the use
of diazepam
no have you been involved in research
involving the use of lorazepam no have
you been involved in research involving
the use of propofol no have you been
involved in research regarding the use
of pentobarbital no have you been
of sodium thiopental no have you been
involved in research regarding the use
of health and gas no have you ever been
involved in research regarding
anesthetics of any sort no okay so two
things are pretty clear there one that
guy is not an expert on anything he's
supposed to be an expert on and two
there's a lot of overlap between the
names of sedatives and the names of
alien races in self-published sci-fi
novels because I could definitely
imagine a book in which the midazolam
unites with a lorazepam to fight the
evil hail Athene and their minions the
pentobarbital in fact you know what I
might not even have to imagine that it's
probably already been optioned by HBO in
their upcoming game of space throats in
two weeks time this network is so deeply
but wait but wait it gets even
worse because when this shaved Santa
here testified in support of using
midazolam in a case that eventually went
before the Supreme Court a full half of
his 300-page expert witness report
consisted of printouts from drugs calm
and look drugs calm is a highly useful
resource for information specifically
information like this disclaimer reading
this material is not intended for
medical advice diagnosis or treatment
it's frankly no wonder that many inmates
do not want midazolam to be used in
their execution in Arizona some of them
actually sued over exactly this and the
Department of Corrections hit on an
ingenious solution to that saying that
inmates could simply bring their own
execution drugs which is pretty
difficult isn't it what with those drugs
being restricted and those prisoners
being in prison
it's basically telling a one-year-olds
to provide his own birthday cake
how the am I supposed to do that I
don't have the money I can't drive I
can't even get out of this chair and I'm
somehow supposed to obtain my own
fudgey the whale this is the
worst birthday when when the head of
Arizona's Department of Corrections was
pressed on that plan he pretty quickly
identified the problem you've never
heard of a prisoner on death row in
Arizona successfully purchasing
federally regulated drugs for use in
their own execution have you no have you
heard of any prisoner anywhere ever
doing that yet not yet no one in the
history of America has ever done this
but I think our inmates can pull it off
it is almost sweet how much he believes
in the people he's in charge of putting
to death
and so far in this story I've held off
on describing specific cases to you but
there are many many examples to show
just how terribly things can go when all
the factors you've seen so far tonight
come together the list of botched
executions is long and it is horrendous
but let's just take one of them Clayton
Lockett back in 2014
Oklahoma made him one of the first
prisoners to be executed using midazolam
and right from the start things did not
go as planned executing Clayton Lockett
with a new three drug combination took
43 minutes a phlebotomist tried
inserting needles into lockets forearms
neck foot groin and buttock minutes
after the execution began lock its
attorney there is a witness says his
client kept trying to raise up and at
one point even said something's wrong
I wanted to hurry up and get it done
with as little transparency as possible
this is what they get yeah that attorney
is right he's late for his gig as a Penn
Jillette impersonator but he's
absolutely right look what happened in
that room was by all accounts incredibly
gruesome and the subsequent
investigation revealed just how
ill-prepared the people of ministering
the objection really
the drugs were not delivered into his
vein they went into the tissue there
were no backup drugs that night there
was no emergency plan if something went
wrong
regarding the use of midazolam mike
oakley from the corrections department
said i looked online you know went past
the key WikiLeaks WikiLeaks or whatever
it is and I did find out midazolam would
render a person unconscious
so we thought it was okay it's true they
looked up midazolam on Wikileaks or
whatever which is just not ideal is it
in fact to make sure that that doesn't
happen again we actually bought
WikiLeaks or whatever calm which is now
just a large banner reading midazolam
doesn't keep you from feeling pain
please stop using it in executions we
also we also added that frog you know
just to cut the change in a little bit
if you click on him he squeaks he's
angry about executions as he well should
be what a frog lethal injection actually
has the highest bot rate of any
execution method so much so last year
two inmates in Tennessee requested and
were executed by the electric chair
because they believed it would be less
painful so incredibly in our desire to
find a more humane method we've ended up
letting amateurs both invent and
administer a form of unpredictable
torture and even some ardent supporters
of the death penalty but this federal
judge will acknowledge that legal
injection just isn't what we like to
think it is I think use of lethal
injection is a way of lying to ourselves
to make it look like executions are
peaceful a benign sort of like going to
sleep and they're not they're brutal
things now you have proposed
alternatives you prefer firing squad to
lethal injections never fails but you
also said the guillotine that's right
really the guillotine well you know it's
a hundred percent effective okay so just
sure but okay
first of all there I desperately wish
that Lesley Stahl have been around
during the French Revolution
really the guillotine come on let me
your old friend Desmond come on second
second if hearing a federal judge
endorse the guillotine makes you
uncomfortable just wait until you find
out that he stepped down in the wake of
numerous sexual misconduct claims
leaving me in the unenviable position of
saying that me to judge who thinks we
should be cutting off more heads
actually make some pretty interesting
points because the the hard truth here
is there is no perfect way for the
government to kill people and you're
probably thinking of alternatives right
now Oh what about assisted suicide can't
we just do the same thing with
executions well no it's harder to kill a
healthy person than someone near death
besides remember doctors and drug
companies won't be involved in
executions okay well what what about
just overdosing them on opioids well
we've actually tried that and one
execution took two hours with the inmate
gulping like a fish out of water but
what about cyanide we tried cyanide gas
in 1992 and it was so horrifying the
Attorney General vomited and the prison
warden claimed he'd resign if forced to
conduct another one I could list methods
all night long
the latest idea is nitrogen gas which
seems like it's got problems of its own
but at the end of the day coming up with
different ideas to do this is a bit like
coming up with positions in which you'd
feel least guilty your mom
missionary that's good for a hips but
you're looking right at her standing up
mom hate standing for any length of time
reverse scowl mom that's probably a best
bet but it's still appalling and the
fact is you shouldn't be doing
it in the first place there's no way to
do this and make you okay what I'm
trying to say here is if the thing
that's making you comfortable with
lethal injection is that it's humane it
isn't because the fundamental fact to
understand about lethal injection is it
is a show it is designed not to minimize
the pain of people being executed but to
maximize the comfort of those who want
to support the death penalty without
confronting the reality of it which is
that it's violent and it's brutal and
it's never going to be anything other
than that
and you might say well I don't care what
happens to death row inmates they're bad
people
but I would argue that lethal injection
isn't about who they are it's about who
we are and if after everything you've
heard tonight you still think we should
be the kind of society that tortures
people to death in this manner then I
guess you're arguing that we should be
like someone who looks at that list of
reasons not to their mom and does
it anyway which is really just a long
way of me saying if we keep executing
people by lethal injections or any other
method we are some real
[Applause]
you